Add device selection explainer (#784)
webmachinelearning/webnn: device-selection-explainer.md

As an example for handling hybrid execution as well as the underlying challenges, take a look at [OpenVINO device selection](https://blog.openvino.ai/blog-posts/automatic-device-selection-and-configuration).

## Minimum Viable Solution

Based on the discussion above, the best starting point would be a simple solution that can be extended and refined later. Namely,
- Remove [MLDeviceType](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) as explicit [context option](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions).
- Update [MLContext](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlcontext) so that it becomes device agnostic, or _default_/_generic_ context. Allow supporting multiple devices with one context.
- Add notes to implementations on how to map [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference) to devices.

> - Improve the device selection hints in [context options](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions) and define their implementation mappings. For instance, should we also include `"low-latency"` as a performance option, or should we rename `"default"` to `"auto"` (alluding to an underlying process, rather than a default setting).

Reviewer: Perhaps make is clearer that the "low-latency" option is a future enhancement. Could e.g. split into two, "starting point" and "future enhancements", or phase 1 and 2.

# Device Selection Explainer

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Participate

Feedback on this explainer is welcome via the issue tracker:

- https://github.com/webmachinelearning/webnn/labels/device%20selection - existing discussions about device selection mechanisms
- see also [all issues](https://github.com/webmachinelearning/webnn/issues) and feel free to open a new issue as appropriate

## Introduction
```

The goal is to help making design decisions on how to handle compute device selection for a WebNN [MLContext](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlcontext).

A context represents the global state of WebNN model graph execution, including the compute devices (e.g. CPU, GPU, NPU) the [WebNN graph](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlgraph) is executed on.

When creating a context, an application may want to provide hints to the implementation on what device(s) are preferred for execution.

Implementations, browsers, and the underlying OS may want to control the allocation of compute devices for various use cases and system conditions.

The question is in what use cases who and how much should control the execution context.

Currently this is captured by [context options](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions), such as [device type](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) and [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference).

## History

> Previous discussion covered the following main topics:MLContext

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previous discussion covered the following main topics:
```

- pure NPU execution,
- NPU preferred, fallback to CPU,
- combined [multiple] NPU and CPU or GPU execution.

### Selecting from multiple [types] of NPUs

The proposal above uses [Web GPU](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb) mechanisms to select a GPU device for a context. This covers support for multiple GPUs, even with different type and capabilities.

We don't have such mechanisms to select NPUs. Also, enumerating and managing adapters are not very web'ish designs. For instance, in order to avoid this complexity and also to minimize fingerprinting surface, the [Presentation API](https://www.w3.org/TR/presentation-api/) outsourced selecting the target device to the user agent, so that the web app can achieve the use case without being exposed with platform specific details.

In the WebNN case, we cannot use such selection mechanisms delegated to the user agent, because the API is used by frameworks, not by web pages.

As such, currently the handling of multiple NPUs (e.g. single model on multiple NPUs, or multiple models on multiple NPUs) is delegated to the implementations and underlying platforms.

### Hybrid execution scenarios using NPU, CPU and GPU

> Many platforms support various hybrid execution scenarios involving NPU, CPU, and GPU (e.g. NPU-CPU, NPU-GPU, NPU-CPU-GPU), but these are not explicitly exposed and controlled in WebNN. They are best selected and controlled by the implementations. However, we should distillate the main use cases behind hybrid execution and define a hinting/mapping mechanism, such as the power preference mentioned earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many platforms support various hybrid execution scenarios involving NPU, CPU, and GPU (e.g. NPU-CPU, NPU-GPU, NPU-CPU-GPU), but these are not explicitly exposed and controlled in WebNN. They are best selected and controlled by the implementations. However, we should distill the main use cases behind hybrid execution and define a hinting/mapping mechanism, such as the power preference mentioned earlier.
```

As an example for handling hybrid execution as well as the underlying challenges, take a look at [OpenVINO device selection](https://blog.openvino.ai/blog-posts/automatic-device-selection-and-configuration).

## Considered alternatives

> 1. Keep the current [MLDeviceType](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) as a context option, but improve the device type names and specify an algorithm for a mapping these names to various real adaptors (with their given characteristics). However, this would be more limited than being able to specify device specific limits to context creation. (This is the current approach).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Keep the current [MLDeviceType](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) as a context option, but improve the device type names and specify an algorithm for a mapping of these names to various real adapters (with their given characteristics). However, this would be more limited than being able to specify device specific limits to context creation. (This is the current approach).
```

## Proposed Minimum Viable Solution

Based on the discussion above, the best starting point would be a simple solution that can be extended and refined later. A first contribution could include the following changes:
- Remove [MLDeviceType](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) as explicit [context option](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions).
- Update [MLContext](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlcontext) so that it becomes device agnostic, or _default_/_generic_ context. Allow supporting multiple devices with one context.
- Add algorithmic steps or notes to implementations on how to map [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference) to devices.
- Also, to align with [GPUPowerPreference](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#enumdef-gpupowerpreference), we should remove the `"default"` [MLPowerPreference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference), i.e. the lack of hints will result in creating a generic context.

Also, the following topics could be discussed already now, but decided later:

> - Improve the device selection hints in [context options](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions) and define their implementation mappings. For instance, discuss whether should we also include a `"low-latency"` performance option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Improve the device selection hints in [context options](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions) and define their implementation mappings. For instance, discuss whether to also include a `"low-latency"` performance option.
```

6. Allow enumeration of [OpSupportLimits](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#api-mlcontext-opsupportlimits-dictionary) before creating a context, so that web apps could select the best device which would work with the intended model. This needs more developer input and examples.

7. As a corollary to 6, allow creating a context using also options for [OpSupportLimits](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#api-mlcontext-opsupportlimits-dictionary).

## Scenarios, examples, design discussion

Examples for user scenarios:

```js
// simple context creation with implementation defaults
context = await navigator.ml.createContext();

// create a context that will likely map to NPU, or NPU+CPU
context =

>   await navigator.ml.createContext({powerPreference: 'low-power'});

Author: Yes, done.

// create a context that will likely map to GPU
context =
  await navigator.ml.createContext({powerPreference: 'high-performance'});

// enumerate devices and limits (as allowed by policy/implementation)
// and select one of them to create a context
const limitsMap = await navigator.ml.opSupportLimitsPerDevice();
// analyze the map and select an op support limit set
// ...
const context = await navigator.ml.createContext({

>     limits: deviceLimitsMap['npu1']

Author: Yes, thanks!

});

// as an alternative, hint a preferred fallback order ["npu", "cpu"]
// i.e. try executing the graph on NPU and avoid GPU as much as possible
// but do as it's best fit with the rest of the context options
const context = await navigator.ml.createContext({ fallback: ['npu', 'cpu'] });

```

## Open questions

- [WebGPU](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/) provides a way to select a GPU device, called [GPUAdapter](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#gpuadapter). Should we align the naming between GPU adapter and WebNN device?

> - Should we expose a similar adapter API for NPUs? Or could NPUs be represented as [GPUAdapter](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#gpuadapter) (basically a few text attributes)?

Author: Thanks for pointing this out, I rephrase it.

## Proposed Minimum Viable Solution

Based on the discussion above, the best starting point would be a simple solution that can be extended and refined later. A first contribution could include the following changes:
- Remove [MLDeviceType](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mldevicetype) as explicit [context option](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions).
- Update [MLContext](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlcontext) so that it becomes device agnostic, or _default_/_generic_ context. Allow supporting multiple devices with one context.
- Add algorithmic steps or notes to implementations on how to map [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference) to devices.

Also, the following topics could be discussed already now, but decided later:

> - Improve the device selection hints in [context options](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions) and define their implementation mappings. For instance, discuss whether should we also include a `"low-latency"` performance option. Also, discuss whether to rename `"default"` to `"auto"` (alluding to an underlying process, rather than a default setting).

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I thought `default` was chosen because of WebGPU's powerPreference, but I'm not seeing that [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/GPU/requestAdapter), just `undefined`. 🤔 I suppose the *default* would simply be automatic selection.

Author: Valid point, actually we should do the same, therefore I remove/rephrase this.

## History

Previous discussion covered the following main topics:MLContext
- who controls the execution context: script vs. user agent (OS);
- CPU vs GPU device selection, including handling multiple GPUs;
- how to handle NPU devices, quantization/dequantization.

In [[Simplify MLContext creation #322]](https://github.com/webmachinelearning/webnn/pull/322), the proposal was to always use an explicit [GPUDevice](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#gpudevice) object to initialize a context and remove the `"gpu"` [context option](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#dictdef-mlcontextoptions).
Also, remove the `'high-performance"` [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference), since it was used for the GPU option, which now becomes explicit.
Explicit GPU selection also provides clarity when there are multiple GPU devices, as implementations need to use [WebGPU](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/) in order to select a [GPUAdapter](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#gpuadapter), from where they can request a [GPUDevice](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#gpudevice) object.

> A counter-argument was that it becomes more complex to use an implementation selected default GPU, as there is no simple way any more to tell implementations to use any GPU device for creating an [MLContext](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#mlcontext). This concern could eventually be alleviated by keeping the `'high-performance"` [power preference](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn/#enumdef-mlpowerpreference).

Reviewer 2: Note (not asking for any changes to this statement, just noting) that on some devices, the NPU is actually faster than the GPU.

Author: Thanks Dwayne! I added this remark, too.
